Good day I'm Norman Wildberger we're hearing on
with our investigation of maxell algebra last
time we started by thinking about sets of natural
numbers say J introducing the idea of associated
frame J cross J just consist of all the pixels
of the form j1 j2 or j1 and j2 belong to j and
this diagonal one maxell which is the sum of all
the e jjs as j runs through j so it's a diagonal
maxell with just ones on the diagonal in the rows
and columns indexed by are given set j and then
associated to this data is a type of maxell we can
consider then just the maxwell's whose support is
in the rows and the columns determined by J so we
call that max J cross J so the type of a maximum
whose support is in J cross J and we saw that if
we take any Maxwell m and multiply on the left
by e sub J and on the right by e sub J then that
restricts the maximal 2 i'm axel supported on J
cross J so that's sort of canonical way of going
to from a general Maxwell to maxell supported in
J cross J now we are going to be interested in
general sets J but sometimes we want to specialize
to rather particular special ones the simplest
kinds of subsets which are just the sets from one
up to some n pick a natural number and consider
the set 1 2 3 up to n it will give that a special
name well let's call it J of n all right so just
a special kind of subset of the natural numbers so
let's have a look at an example so J is 134 then
J cross J is this set of pixels the pixels who
who's rose r 1 3 or 4 and whose columns are
also won three or four there are nine such
pixels okay so to illustrate that relation from
the previous slide here is a general Maxwell em
and we're multiplying on the left by e sub J and
on the right also by the same a sub J and you
can check the multiplication that what happens is
that basically the rows 1 3 & 4 are maintained and
the columns 1 3 & 4 are maintained but the other
rows are replaced with zeros so that were always
sort of deleted that rose deleted that column is
deleted that column is deleted that's the effect
of the this multiplication post and pre by e sub
J it just restricts our Maxwell to the J cross J
set that were interested in so the interesting
thing about Max J cross J is first of all that
it's closed under multiplication that's very
interesting ok so you take any tomb axles which
are supported on here their product will also be
supported on that same set and we can see that say
by looking at it this way that any to max holes in
this type are the form e JM ej so if we take ejm
ej and multiply it by EJ and EJ well everything
is associative we can simplify things a little
bit because this ej squared just becomes ej that's
an idempotent property of ej and we can see that
the result is also something in the form AJ times
something times EJ so we get another maxell which
is supported in the set and this type is also
closed under addition in fact also under a scalar
multiplication and so we're going to call this am
Axl subalgebra of our framework of all Maxwell's
okay it's not a set it's just a type and we're
going to call that type of maxell subalgebra
alright so some natural special cases are when
we consider JN cross JN and we'll write that a
little bit more concisely as just max n by n so
that refers to Mac souls who are supported on the
first n rows and first and columns where n is a
natural number 1 2 3 etc so max one by one we're
talking about Max holes which are just supported
in that top left-hand corner the only entry is
possible so here are two such Maxwell's and we
can take their sum we get another maxell the
same kind we can take their product we get another
maxell the same kind we see that the arithmetic of
these particular very simple kinds of maxwell's is
really essentially just the same as the arithmetic
of natural numbers so the natural numbers are
sitting in the top left hand corner a copy of
the natural numbers if you like is sitting in the
top left-hand corner of our world of Maxwell's or
our screen and everything here is really just a
multiple of that diagonal one maxell eone one so
we can also rewrite this by saying that to be 11
+ 3 e 11 equals 5 e 11 and the product to e 11 x
3 11 is 6 p-11 this is another way of saying that
alright so somewhat bigger the two-by-two case
we're talking about max two by two so our set of
natural numbers is just the set 12 we're talking
about Max those who supported in the top little
corner to buy to block so we can of course add
those in the familiar point wise way and we can
multiply them just the way we multiply two-by-two
matrices so the center here is 1 times 5 plus 3
times 2 etc and alternatively we can write any
such maxell as a linear combination of the basis
kind of Maxwell's a 1 1 e 1 2 e 2 1 and E 2 2 so
this combination here isn't a way of writing this
maxell here and in this situation the identity
is the max Oh EJ equals e 1 1 plus e 22 so it's
the maxell that looks like this and this really
is a two-sided identity in the sense that you can
multiply an arbitrary maxell in here by EJ either
on the left or on the right and you recover
em and we might also note that the multiples
of EJ so if you multiply this by n say 22 33 44
they form another kind of copy of the natural
numbers but now inside this two-by-two block
or algebra of matrices so we're going up here
and it's a huge jump actually in complexity going
from the one by one case to EU in this two-by-two
block okay it's a enormously richer arena and so
that's going to be one of the themes that I want
you slowly to appreciate is that what we're doing
here is not just creating a framework for linear
algebra but we're extending arithmetic kind of
a multi-dimensional way or two-dimensional way
still having just a one dimensional arithmetic
we're having a two-dimensional arithmetic and
we can see that it's already pretty interesting
at this still relatively simple level here so of
course we can keep going we have the one by
one Maxwell's there and then the two by two
Maxwell's the three by three Maxwell's four by
four Maxwell's so we have this sort of nested
sequence of maxell subalgebra max one by one
sitting inside max two by two sitting inside
max three by three sitting inside max 4 by 4 and
so on now in this case when I say and so on I mean
well you can keep going as far as you can write
things down so here I've Illustrated things up to
N equals 4 but I could illustrate more okay but
I'm not really claiming that you know we can go
to infinity or anything like that I'm just saying
that we can extend this list a little bit further
if we want to so these algebra is releasable two
rows of this big world of maxwell's are really
absolutely fundamental erath medical objects in
mathematics okay it's hard to overemphasize how
important they are in modern mathematics the way
we think about things in fact also in physics now
it's rather interesting to observe that another
kind of subalgebra the form ax J cross J where J
is a more general or arbitrary kind of subset is
actually arithmetic alee identical to one of these
relatively simple ones that emanate from the top
which are sort of in the corner let me illustrate
that with this example here so here is a situation
where j is 1 3 4 so we're talking about max which
is supported on the rose 134 and on the columns
134 like this one here and here's another one
that's also supported in the Rose 134 and columns
134 now if you do the maximal multiplication of
these two you will get this one I hope you can
check and so for example this size 17 is obtained
by taking the SPRO and that column so 2 times 3
that's 6 plus 0 times 0 plus 2 times 5 that's 10
plus 1 times 1 that's 1 so 6 plus 10 plus one
that's 17 ok so this arithmetic air is really
the same arithmetic that's occurring in this 3
by 3 block and you can see that by looking at
the corresponding 3 by 3 maxell where you take the
same numbers that are appearing here but just sort
of get rid of these rows of zeros and columns of
zeros that are intermediate and then you can check
that this maximal times this maxell is essentially
this maxell here so that arithmetic alee whether
we're working in a subalgebra determined by the
set 134 or the set 123 really doesn't make much
difference algebraically it'd be more convenient
to think about this as the canonical object
but that's rather arbitrary so please convince
yourself of this this is very interesting aspect
things that opens your mind to the richness of
this maxell business so let me illustrate what I
just said by enlarging our view a little bit more
and considering two sets of natural numbers J and
J Prime and we're going to assume that these two
sets are disjoint meaning that their intersection
is empty okay so we have two disjoint subsets of
natural numbers each one a limit is associated
with a idempotent east of j + e sub J Prime and
we saw that in this kind of situation the product
of EJ and EJ Prime in either order gives us the 0
maxell okay so that has an important consequence
it implies that we can take the sum of these
subalgebra is in an interesting way so associated
to j we have the sub algebra at max J cross J of
Maxwell's supported on J cross J and associated to
j prime we have the subalgebra max j prime cross
J prime things supported on J prime cross J Prime
and now what we're going to do is we're going to
combine these by considering Maxwell's of the form
M plus M prime where the M belongs to this type
and the M prime belongs to this type so we'll take
combinations of Maxwell's one supported on J cross
J another one supported on J prime cross J Prime
and that will create a new type for us and we're
going to write that new type in the kind of an
obvious way we'll just right max J cross J plus
max J Prime cross J Prime making it very clear
what we're doing so for example suppose j is 1 2
and j prime is 3 45 so these two sets are disjoint
their intersection is empty okay so max J cross J
what does that look like it looks like this here
is the frame J cross J so we're talking about
all Maxwell's who are supported on this little
too but to block up here while max j prime cross J
Prime we're talking about all the maxwell's which
are supported on this 3 by 3 block here columns 3
4 5 rows 3 4 5 so when we talk about Max J cross
J plus max J Prime cross J Prime we are talking
about Max's who support is in this union so their
support is this set of pixels a union this set
of pixels and pleasantly this is closed under
addition and multiplication so please check that
right it's really coming down to this crucial fact
here this is really the reason for this but if
you take any two max holes which are supported
in this combination set and you multiply them
you can get another maxell in this combination
set so this is now a new kind of subalgebra of
a different kind from the simple subalgebra so
the kind max J cross J that we're considering
a little bit more complicated but essentially a
building up of those kinds and you can check that
the identity in this situation is just the sum of
the identity in first so algebra plus the identity
in the second subalgebra so here are a few more
examples of this kind of thinking a little
bit more subtle in this case we have j equals
2 3 & j prime is 15 so these subsets don't have
to be adjacent elements what they can be rather
arbitrary so 2 3 corresponds to this block right
here while 15 corresponds to this frame right here
consisting of these four pixels so max J cross
J is all maxvill supported on this frame max J
prime cross J prime is all Maxwell's supported
on that frame so when we take the sum which
oui madame axles which are supported on this
union frame and this is a valid observation even
an ordinary matrix algebra you just take a 5 by 5
matrix whose support is these particular entries
here and 0 elsewhere you take any two of those and
you either add them or multiply them you're going
to get another one of that type it's a subalgebra
fact also if you multiply by any scalar you'll
also get another one of that type and here's a
similar kind of story where we're now taking not
just two disjoint subsets but we're taking three
disjoint subsets j which is 12 j prime which is 3
5 6 & j double prime which is seven ok so we
have maxell subalgebra is associated to each
one of these subsets so the subalgebra associated
to 12 would be this block up here them subalgebra
associate two three five six would be this
block here it's not really a block but it's
a combination of these individual pieces and well
the one associated to seven would just be this one
by one block down here ok so we can take the sum
of these individual subalgebra and we're going to
get a bigger subalgebra so the claim is again the
same thing that you can take the sum of any two
maxell supported on this thing you can get another
one supported on that thing and more interestingly
the product of any two maxell supported on this
frame will be another maxell supported on the
spring so it really is a sub algebra so perhaps
you can see that there's an interesting question
here the interesting question is which frames in
other words which set of pixels F support maxell
subalgebra in other words if we have a frame and
we consider it just the Mac souls who support
is in that particular frame when do we get those
Maxwell's forming a subalgebra meaning that there
closed under addition and multiplication and that
they also contain a two-sided identity those are
the three main features that we were looking
at so it turns out this is a very interesting
question and I'm going to leave this for you to
think about front of the law and you can do quite
a lot of investigation in this direction and it
turns out that you will perhaps discover quite a
lot of interesting connections also with maybe
other branches of mathematics one interesting
thing so we're starting to see I hope that maxell
algebra is not just an enlargement and unification
of matrix algebra which it is so we're thinking
about the algebra of matrices in in a bigger
way but it's also starting to be a framework for
higher arithmetic we're seeing a richness of just
arithmetic side for many applications to linear
algebra just in the arena for doing arithmetic
which is larger and sort of opens our minds to
different erith medical possibilities and we'll
see that that's a very very important aspect of
this story so next time what I want to do is in
fact so motivated by our familiarity now with
some of these Maxim's in this two-dimensional
setting I want to look at the corresponding
one-dimensional situation which I could have
done earlier but then the motivation wouldn't have
been so clear so if we look at these Maxwell's
and we sort of look at the Moreau by row or
perhaps column by column we're picking out
one dimensional situations right a particular row
is really just a one-dimensional object so what
kind of a one-dimensional object is it well it's
something like a vector but we're going to see
that just as we replaced matrices with Maxwell's
we're going to want to replace vectors with vexos
which are enlarged views on vectors and unify
vectors for us so pretty interesting and that's
really going to set up the the kind of crucial
in variant of am axle which is the rank of a
Axl so give it a maxell there's really one very
important question to ask about it namely what
is it's a prank and we have to define what this
rank is it's a very important number associated
to a maxell and so we're going to investigate a
little bit about vectors in order to answer that
question alright so I hope you'll join me for
that I'm Norman Wildberger thanks for listening
you